Page on functions and steps (#797)
inngest/website: pages/docs/learn/inngest-functions.mdx

import IconConcurrency from 'src/shared/Icons/FlowControl/Concurrency';

export const description = 'Learn what Inngest functions are and of what they are capable.';

# Inngest Functions

> Inngest functions enable developers to create and manage event-driven workflows. They offer a flexible way to build and manage event-driven workflows and background tasks, providing robust tools for retrying, scheduling, and coordinating complex sequences of operations.

Reviewer: **suggestion**: While accurate, I don't know if we want to push the "event-driven workflows" term hard here (and also not twice). I might instead share what it allows a developer achieve like "run reliable background logic, from background jobs to complex workflows." We don't push "event-driven" on our site or other places so I'd rather describe the benefits/outcomes and then explain how it works.

> Inngest functions enable developers run reliable background logic, from background jobs to complex workflows

This page covers components of an Inngest function, as well as introduces different kinds of functions. If you'd like to learn more about Inngest's execution model, check the ["How Inngest functions are executed"](/docs/learn/how-functions-are-executed) page.

## Anatomy of an Inngest function

Let's have a look at the following Inngest function:

```ts
import { inngest } from "./client";

export default inngest.createFunction(
    // config
  { id: "import-product-images" },
    // trigger (event or cron)
  { event: "shop/product.imported" },
    // handler function
    async ({ event, step }) => {
      // here goes the business logic
      return copyAllImagesToS3(event.data.imageURLs);
      // if you need to perform more than one task,
      // wrap each one in step.run()
    };
);
```

> The above code can be translated as:

Reviewer: **suggestion**: "explained" instead of translated?

> This Inngest function is called `import-product-images`. When an event called `shop/product.imported` is received, run a function called `copyAllImagesToS3`.

Let's have a look at each of this function's components.

<Callout>
💡 You can test Inngest functions using standard tooling such as Jest or Mocha. To do so, export the job code and run standard unit tests.

> </Callout>

Reviewer: This isn't super straight forward as it sounds.  I might suggest to hide this until we have a guide for testing.

### Config

> The first parameter of the `createFunction` method specifies Inngest function's configuration. In the above example, the `id` is specified, which will be used to identify the function in the [Inngest Dev Server](/docs/local-development):

Reviewer: **suggestion**: We omit "Dev Server" here as this ID is used in cloud as well. Specifically, the ID is used within an _App_, but that might be too much detail. We can just leave this as "which will be used to identify the function in the Inngest system."

With the screen shot, you can maybe add: "You can see this ID in the Dev server's function list"

Author: Oh, right, of course.

<img
  src="/assets/docs/local-development/dev-server-functions.png"
  width="400" height={400/2762*1868} quality="95"
  className="rounded-md"
  alt="Screenshot of the Inngest Dev Server interface showing three functions listed under the 'Functions' tab. The functions are: 'store-events,' 'Generate monthly report,' and 'Customer Onboarding,' each with their respective triggers and App URLs."
/>

> You can also provide other [configuration options](/docs/reference/functions/create#configuration), such as `concurrency`, `throttle`, `debounce`, `rateLimit`, `priority`, `batchEvents`, or `idempotency` (preventing duplicate events from triggering the function within 24 hours). You can also specify how many times the function will retry, what callback function will run on failure, and when to cancel the function.

Reviewer: **suggestion**: leave out the idempotency explainer and instead link to the flow control overview page?

### Trigger

> Inngest functions are designed to be triggered by events or crons (schedules). Events can come from various sources like HTTP requests, your own code, or external webhooks. When an event is received, it triggers a corresponding function to execute the tasks defined in the function handler (see the ["Handler" section](/docs/functions/overview#handler) below).

Reviewer: **suggestion**: I'd suggest to lead with the SDK in the list of sources
```suggestion
Inngest functions are designed to be triggered by events or crons (schedules). Events can be [sent from your own code](/docs/events) or received from third party webhooks or API requests. When an event is received, it triggers a corresponding function to execute the tasks defined in the function handler (see the ["Handler" section](/docs/functions/overview#handler) below).
```

> Each function needs at least one trigger. However, you can also work with [multiple triggers](/docs/guides/multiple-triggers) to invoke your function whenever any of the events or crons is received.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each function needs at least one trigger. However, you can also work with [multiple triggers](/docs/guides/multiple-triggers) to invoke your function whenever any of the events are received or cron schedule occurs.
```

### Handler

A "handler" is the core function that defines what should happen when the function is triggered. In the example above, the handler contains only one function called `copyAllImagesToS3`.

> Handler receives context, which includes the event data (like `event.data.imageURLs` in the example above), logging configuration, and tools for managing execution flow (such as `step.run`, `step.sleep()`, or `step.waitForEvent()`.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The handler receives context, which includes the event data (like `event.data.imageURLs` in the example above), logging configuration, and tools for managing execution flow (such as `step.run`, `step.sleep()`, or `step.waitForEvent()`.)
```

<Callout>
   💡 If your handler contains numerous functions, it is a good practice to wrap each one in a step. In this way, you can manage complex state easier and if any task fails, it will be retried independently from others.

> </Callout>

Reviewer: _See high level review comment_

To summarize, the handler allows you to define detailed logic that should happen in response to the triggering event.

## Kinds of Inngest functions

> ### <a href="/docs/guides/background-jobs" className="flex items-center gap-4"><IconConcurrency size="2rem"/> Background functions</a> {{anchor: false}}

Reviewer: **idea**: We could use the tiles/cards for these with maybe 2 columns? I'm happy either way, just thought it might be an option!

> Long tasks can be executed outside the critical path of the main flow, which improves app's performance and reliability. Perfect for data pipelines or data processing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Long tasks can be executed outside the critical path of the main flow, which improves app's performance and reliability. Perfect for communicating with third party APIs or executing long-running code.
```

### <a href="/docs/guides/scheduled-functions" className="flex items-center gap-4"><IconConcurrency size="2rem"/> Scheduled functions</a> {{anchor: false}}

Inngest's scheduled functions enable you to run tasks automatically at specified intervals using cron schedules. These functions ensure consistent and timely execution without manual intervention. Perfect for routine operations like sending weekly reports or clearing caches.

### <a href="/docs/guides/delayed-functions" className="flex items-center gap-4"><IconConcurrency size="2rem"/> Delayed functions</a> {{anchor: false}}

> You can equeue an Inngest function to run at a specific time in the future. The task will be executed exactly when needed without manual intervention. Perfect for actions like sending follow-up emails or processing delayed orders.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can enqueue an Inngest function to run at a specific time in the future. The task will be executed exactly when needed without manual intervention. Perfect for actions like sending follow-up emails or processing delayed orders.
```

### <a href="/docs/guides/multi-step-functions" className="flex items-center gap-4"><IconConcurrency size="2rem"/> Multi-step functions</a> {{anchor: false}}

> Multi-step functions allow you to create complex workflows. You can coordinate between multiple steps, including waiting for other events, delaying execution, or running code conditionally based on previous steps or incoming events. Each step is individually retriable, making the workflow robust against failures. Ideal for scenarios like onboarding flows or conditional notifications.

Reviewer: _See high level review comment_
